Docs: Plugin E2E - Add feature toggles article (#723)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/test-a-plugin/guides/feature-toggles.md

---
id: feature-toggles
title: Feature toggles

> description: How to use feature toggles in e2e tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: How to use feature toggles in E2E tests
```

Reviewer: Note that I'm pretty agnostic as to whether e2e or E2E is used, and defer to your judgment. so long as we are consistent. In Google searches, E2E seemed a bit more prominent than e2e in other documentation, so I have suggested a potential change.

Author: That's great @josmperez - we should be consistent. I prefer `e2e` over `E2E`.

draft: true
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - testing
  - e2e
  - feature toggles
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Introduction

> Feature toggles are used to enable or disable features in Grafana. Feature toggles can have big impact on how a plugin behaves, so you may need to cater for that within you e2e tests. `@grafana/plugin-e2e` has a few fixtures that helps while working with feature toggles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grafana offers a mechanism that allows code to be turned "on" or "off" without the need for deployment. These mechanisms, called _feature toggles_, can have big impact on how a plugin behaves, so you may need to cater for that within your end-to-end (E2E) tests. This guide describes the features of `@grafana/plugin-e2e` that make it easier to work with feature toggles.
```

 mechanism that allows code to be turned “on” or “off” remotely without the need for a deploy. F

> ## Passing feature toggles to Grafana

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pass feature toggles to Grafana
```

> The easisest way to configure feature toggles that are available across the entire Grafana stack is by specifying [environment variables](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#override-configuration-with-environment-variables) when starting your Grafana instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easisest way to configure feature toggles that are available across the entire Grafana stack is to specify the [environment variables](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#override-configuration-with-environment-variables) operational when starting your Grafana instance.
```

> The easisest way to configure feature toggles that are available across the entire Grafana stack is by specifying [environment variables](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#override-configuration-with-environment-variables) when starting your Grafana instance.

Reviewer 2: This is just an idea and maybe wrong: would it be useful to also share a short snippet on how to enable a certain feature flag using the `GF_` env variables? I feel like it's not that easy to figure out from the other docs. (And with that said, probably it's not the responsibility of this doc to fix that, and maybe it's not good if we have things documented in multiple places. Maybe @josmperez has an opinion on this.)

Author: Yeah good question. I thinking referring to the configuration docs is better as this might be subject to change in the future. WDYT @sympatheticmoose?

Reviewer 3: I'd lean towards including an example. But no strong preference.

> this might be subject to change in the future

How do you expect this to change?

> ## Overriding frontend feature toggles in e2e tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Override frontend feature toggles in E2E tests
```

> ## Overriding frontend feature toggles in e2e tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Override frontend feature toggles in E2E tests
```

> `@grafana/plugin-e2e` allows you to override the frontend feature toggles that Grafana is configured to use. You can do that by specifying the custom option `featureToggles` in the playwright config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`@grafana/plugin-e2e` allows you to override the frontend feature toggles that Grafana is configured to use. You can do that by specifying the custom option `featureToggles` in the Playwright config file.
```

```typescript
// playwright.config.ts
import { defineConfig, devices } from '@playwright/test';
import { PluginOptions } from '@grafana/plugin-e2e';

export default defineConfig<PluginOptions>({
  testDir: './tests',
  reporter: 'html',
  use: {
    baseURL: 'http://localhost:3000',
    featureToggles: {
      experimentalPluginQueryEditor: false,
      experimentalPluginConfigEditor: true,
    },
  },
  ...
}
```

> :::note Feature toggles that are defined this way are propagated to `window.grafanaBootData.settings.featureToggles`. This means they will only have an impact on the frontend of Grafana. If you need the feature toggle to have an impact across the entire stack, see the [previous section](#passing-feature-toggles-to-grafana).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note 

Feature toggles that are defined this way are propagated to `window.grafanaBootData.settings.featureToggles`. This means they will only have an impact on the frontend of Grafana. If you need the feature toggle to have an impact across the entire stack, see the [previous section](#passing-feature-toggles-to-grafana).

:::
```

Reviewer: Note the spacing around inline notes is needed to avoid a glitch with Prettier.

:::

> ### Overriding feature toggles in a specific test file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Override feature toggles in a specific test file
```

You can override feature toggles for tests in a certain test file.

```typescript
import { test, expect } from '@grafana/plugin-e2e';

test.use({
  featureToggles: {
    experimentalPluginQueryEditor: true,
  },
});
```

> ## Checking whether a feature is enabled or not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Check whether a feature is enabled
```

> You may use the `isFeatureToggleEnabled` fixture to checks whether a certain frontend feature toggle is enabled or not. Under the hood, `isFeatureToggleEnabled` checks whether the given feature is defined and enabled in the `window.grafanaBootData.settings.featureToggles` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `isFeatureToggleEnabled` fixture to determine whether a certain frontend feature toggle is enabled. Under the hood, `isFeatureToggleEnabled` checks whether the given feature is defined and enabled in the `window.grafanaBootData.settings.featureToggles` object.
```
